# Drawing Gantt diagrams
This tutorial shows how to draw Gantt diagrams to show the succession of tasks in the CPU, using the `gnuplot` application, which is present in the official Ubuntu repositories; to install it, use:
```shell
sudo apt-get install gnuplot
sudo apt-get install gnuplot-x11
```
Gnuplot is a command-line based plotting software, so plots are generated by the program by reading a text file containing a script and then issuing the following comand inside a shell:
```shell
gnuplot ganttExample.gnuplot
```
A sample script is in the file called `ganttExample.gnuplot`.

## Comment to ganttExample.gnuplot
The data to be plotted are inputted to gnuplot in the first part of the file, between the ```$DATA << EOD``` and the ```EOD``` keywords.
For example, in our case it will be:

|  Task name   |  Task start   |  Task end   |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  Task1   |  1   |  5   |
|  Task2   |  11   |  13   |
|  Task3   |   13  |  53   |
> Comments start with the `#` character.

####Specify the output file
The save path for the output is specified inside the script, as is its extension and its dimensions.
```shell
set terminal png size 1920,1080
set output "gantt.png"
```
These commands are specifying a `.png` output `1920x1080` pixels big, whose name will be `gantt.png`. 
#### Format the axes
These commands set the maximum and minimum values that will be shown on the x and y axes: the x axis will start from -1 and will stretch as much as it needs, while the y axis will go from 0 to `y=5.5`.
```shell
set xrange [-1:]
set yrange [0:5.5]
```

These commands set the appeararance and the number of ticks for axis intervals.
```shell
set xtics scale 2, 1.0
set ytics scale 2, 1.0
set mxtics 5
```

With this command we tell the program to explicitly highlight some values on an axis. In this example, it will put a lable at x=1,5,11,13,53 with those values, to find them immediately. On the y axis we will put a lable for each Task:
```shell
set xtics ("1" 1.0, "5" 5.0, "11" 11.0, "13" 13.0, "53" 53.0)
set ytics("Task1" 1.0, "Task2" 2.0)
```
> Attention: in the "raw" data we're plotting, don't put text, but only numbers. The association between a task name and a y value is done in this step.

This command needs no explanation; it is used to put a title and a subtitle to the plot:
```shell
set title "{/=15 20000Hz, 100 ticks delay, NO preemption, NO timeslicing}\n\n{/:5 tasks with same priority}"
```
#### Change the arrows' appearance
The arrows' appeararance can be changed by tweaking the line:
```shell
set style arrow 1 filled size screen 0.01, 30 fixed lt 10 lw 4
```
where  `0.01,30` is the dimension of the point, and `lw` is the tail's thickness. Changing `lt` modifies the arrows' color.



